---
title: 'Acting Training in Ontario'
date: 2024-09-26T13:38:38-04:00
tags: ['Policy', 'Theatre']
---

Michael Rubenfeld posted on Facebook about the gulf between the expectations of a young artist and the realities of an…well, I guess I’ll say old artist, even though Michael isn’t an old guy. But an artist closer to pension age than college parties, anyway. The expectations of all the young artists who are elevated by their peers and mentors in school, then maybe in post-secondary, then in some early festivals and engagements, but then start to see the reality - the whole arts landscape in Canada, and honestly across most of the world, is held together with dental floss.

In a separate thread he mentioned that students should be exposed to the amount of money they’re likely to make over the course of their careers. Some, like Ric Waugh (hey Rick!) said they do expose students to those realities, but students tend to think they’ll beat the odds. I remember hearing teachers talk about their dire finances, and they eventually got tenured University jobs, so by definition they were doing way better than most. And hell, I was that student - I went through the program, and thought I could beat the odds!

But the conversation made me think - what the hell are we doing with acting training in this country?

I’m going to speak pretty directly about jobs and money in this piece, because jobs and money satisfy all the lower parts of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, and should be forefront in our minds when we design programs that determine what someone will do for the rest of their life. Yes, the arts are great because they create transcendent experiences and connect us with other humans, and yes, school is great because it allows you to become your own person, but a transcendent experience, becoming your own person, and three dollars gets you a cup of coffee. Artists are low income people, rent is profoundly expensive in most Canadian cities, and the price of education is extremely high. This was not always the case - relative rents in many Canadian cities were lower in previous decades, arts funding was higher in real dollars, and education was more heavily subsidized, so dreaming away at school may have been feasible in a different age, but it’s not anymore.

I’m also speaking mostly about acting, even though it’s only part of the theatre and film ecosystem, which exist in the arts & entertainment world. I speak about acting training because many playwrights, directors, and stage managers start out in acting school, and even in film schools, pedagogy often focuses on acting, even if many film school students end up working in crews. And I’m thinking about theatre and film because relative to incomes, it seems like acting schools ballooned. There aren’t 20 colleges in Ontario offering Opera or Poetry degrees, but acting schools are everywhere now.

As I see it, there are a few separate tranches of arts instruction in Canada. Universities, which typically offer BA or BFA programs in Drama/Theatre/Acting, sometimes with a minor, with a blend of conservatory training and liberal arts education; Colleges, which offer 2-3 year diploma programs, mostly conservatory training with some technical or business courses; and private training, which can run the gamut from audition classes in someone’s living room/zoom to cults to private film schools which will take as much money as you’ll throw at them and that, if you’re lucky, might connect you with a university so you can eventually get a degree.

University drama programs are…whatever. They are where you study drama, partly academically, partly practically. I graduated from one, and like all liberal arts education programs, it sends a certain class signal that you went to a University, and also allows you to ladder into other University programs - MFA, MBAs, MPAs (me, it’s me), B.Ed, JD, MDiv, whatever. When the University graduate realizes they’ll never make it in the arts industry, they have a piece of paper that might allow them to get another piece of paper that can get them what’s left of a middle class life in Canada. The quality of the acting training at Universities is all over the place, but in more than a few cases it’s the only arts training and arts production for miles around, and it’s part of a holistic education system (just as Drama students need to take Physics, some Physics students need to take Drama), so whatever, it’s fine for the purpose of this investigation.

Private institutions are…well, again, some of them are literally cults, others are small businesses, and some are giant institutions that pretend to be legitimate schools and actually are just a way to burn through lots of money. I tend to think the first should be investigated by the RCMP, the third should be regulated by the ministries of Education, and the second should be watched like a hawk less it turns into the first or third. But actors and people in the industry demand these courses for professional development and networking, and you don’t want to be so heavy handed with regulation that you ban legitimate small businesses, so they should probably exist.

But what boggles my mind is just how many college programs there are. I’m going to speak about Ontario for a bit, because it’s almost half the country’s population, is disproportionately  productive compared to the non-English part of the other half when it comes to arts, and is also where most of the arts training takes place. Ontario Colleges were created during the Davis government in the 60s, with the idea of providing **vocational, technological, and general education**. They are, at their heart, job training institutions. If you go to acting school at a college, you are not there to study drama - you're there to train as an actor. I think that's an *incredibly* important distinction. The colleges also offer continuing education, and general education is part of the mandate, but enrolling in most Ontario college programs - practical nursing, IT, trades, etc, is done with the idea of job placement. Ontario Colleges website lists at least 11 separate streams of acting, but 18 for theatre performance. If you blend all the programs that are acting adjacent at Ontario colleges, there are certainly more than 20, maybe high 20s. Each of these programs can be 15 or 20 students, meaning Ontario colleges are graduating maybe 400 new actors per year.

These are programs that are publicly supported - the buildings and staff are paid for with tax dollars, and the student tuition doesn't nearly cover those costs. Some of the tuition is also tax subsidized, through programs like OSAP, which helps low income students attend college and university. And they’re regulated through the ministry of education, so there should theoretically be value for money audits and industry placement statistics routinely performed.

And my question is…how do these colleges pass those value for money audits? If you’re subsidizing an industry through grants and job training in an area that doesn’t have a mature industry of that sort, the hope is that eventually the industry will be self-supporting. This is always a bit tricky in arts and culture, because most of the industry relies on cross subsidies, partnerships, grants, philanthropy, but there are sustainable non-profit theatres across the country which get relatively little public funding and can produce quite a lot of theatre. It’s not clear to me that this is the case with regional acting colleges.

I tend to think that artistic production is good for an economy - there’s always a lot of creative accounting done by tourism boards and arts agencies that say “every dollar invested in the arts turns out $7”, but those kinds of multiplier effects are usually a joke. However, I think it’s pretty clear that there’s a causal relationship between artistic production in a geography and returns to hospitality, tourism, and retail in a given location. Clearly the Stratford Festival costs a lot of government dollars, but it also absorbs a much larger amount of private dollars through donations and ticket sales, and the town of Stratford is one of the nicest in the country due to the amount of money flowing through it, most of which stems from the festival. You can’t, unfortunately, set up an internationally renowned Shakespeare festival in every old mining and pig rendering town, but if you got in while the getting was good, it was a great economic development strategy. But it’s clear that putting a theatre program in a small town, which has huge operating subsidies and relatively low private inputs, doesn’t revitalize an economy in the same way.

The bigger problem is the output. Think about the amount of students we accept into training programs, and the amount of jobs on the other end. In Canada, we do a form of central planning for doctors. Arguably we train too few - I think way too few - but that system ensures job placements so well that when a resident can’t match with a job, it’s a national news story. Our engineering, commerce, agriculture, and other STEM programs don’t have such a quota system, but those job markets are pretty flexible, and most engineers and accountants find work that’s adjacent to their field. Graduates of the arts and humanities at Universities often have trouble finding good or stable work (again, it’s me), but the data is usually clear that those with these degrees make more money than those without. And graduates of trade schools can do apprenticeships, which, while also often problematic and locked up, can usually find them work.

Acting graduates from colleges? It’s a whole different world. ACTRA put out some statistics from their census (which I got from Ric Waugh - hi again!), showing the percentage of card carrying ACTRA members who earn most of their income from acting is, at most, 2%.

2%. 1 in 50 union actors makes a living doing their craft. Imagine for a second that only 2% of doctors found placements. Or engineers, or accountants, or carpenters, or any other job.

You’d shut all those schools down and think again, right?

But for the most part, we don’t. There are over 20 college job training programs producing some 400+ actors every year in this province. Sure, Humber’s performing arts stream was shut down. That was a small tragedy in the Toronto community, and for good reason - lots of artists got some of their work there! And their graduates were often very good actors. Humber probably shouldn’t have been first on the chopping block, but when you compare the amount of actors this province trains with the amount of working actors, some programs have to get chopped.

Maybe this is an austerity mindset, but even in the most fantastical scenarios, there’s a limit to how many actors in our contemporary economy can make a living plying their craft. Having a huge surplus of actors pumped out by our colleges makes that number lower, weakens existing actors' efforts at the bargaining table, and doesn’t necessarily produce better art at the end of the day. There’s a reason there are so many rich kids in acting nowadays, and it’s because they have the financial security to do good work, take their time, and be creative. If the rest of actors are part of - to use a Marxist term - the reserve army of labour, where they’re working crappy jobs and shooting self tapes in the few minutes between shifts, they’ll get crowded out by people with family money.

By limiting the amount of acting programs, we could limit the supply of actors in Ontario competing for these parts, and by redirecting the funds away from training programs towards operating and project funding for theatres and film production companies, we could increase the amount of work available. If only 2% of film actors are getting routine enough work to pay the bills, then these training institutions are serving *acting teachers* better than they’re serving actors, and while it’s great for actors to get work teaching - most other artistic professions supplement their incomes with teaching - if there are that many unemployed actors in the province, it doesn’t make sense to subsidize the teaching of more. We should close some of these programs down and transfer the money into artistic production in regions where there’s already an acting industry.

I’m aware there are very good arguments against this, and I’d like to address some of them:

1. Colleges serve Working class actors with less money and lower grades

- This is true. University training is more expensive than college training, and the higher admission averages bias against lower income students, who are due to societal constructs likely to have lower grades in secondary school than higher income students. As more and more arts jobs are taken by nepo babies and people from ultra elite schools (this is maybe more of a problem in the US and UK, but is an issue here as well), having acting program in colleges allows other students to access acting.

- However, I think it’s also true that promising low income students an acting career when 2% of actors make it (*less! Because that’s the actors who have gotten into the union!*) and taking their money for doing so, and keeping them out of the labour pool for two or three years is not really serving low income kids.

2. These programs bring theatre to small towns

- To a degree, yes. College acting programs allow there to be theatre productions that are usually of a higher calibre than secondary school theatre productions or amateur theatre. But the students are paying for the privilege of acting in these amateur productions, and it’s fairly clear many of them have little to no pathway to professionalization. The subsidies to students and schools are massive, and amateur theatre is done inexpensively - couldn’t these subsidies be directed to Little Theatres and local players groups instead? And this is also the argument for the regional theatre movement, which I think accomplishes producing art in small places more effectively than college training.

3. Students shouldn’t have to move from their hometowns to take acting classes

- I’m not sure this is a defensible argument. Acting is a team art, and theatre and film thrive in congregate settings. You need large amounts of people to make audiences, you need lots of competition and networking, you need opposing points of view and working groups and festivals and late nights at openings and all that. This isn’t to say that towns can’t make great art, or people from towns can’t be good artists. Of course they can. But historically, cities produce the vast quantity of art in a given culture, because a) artists like moving to cities, and b) that’s where there are more people to work on and appreciate the art. And this is more true for performing arts than written or recorded arts. If there isn’t at least a reasonable arts industry in the town where the student trains, then they have to move as soon as they finish training, and will have to develop entirely new networks. Like I did! Believe me, it sucks!

4. Colleges provide jobs for working actors

- There is some use in this argument - lots of the colleges employ working actors, and give them opportunities to do work that the industry won’t, like transitioning to directing. And it’s good pedagogy to have working actors teach young actors. Most British schools used to function this way, and many actors from the mid-century learned as apprentices in touring companies, not through formal schooling. God knows there are acting teachers in Universities who rarely acted professionally, and have little knowledge of the industry. Acting as a skill requires pedagogy and mentorship, and having working actors interact with students is good for job opportunities.

- But crucially, those working actors should be teaching students *where they do some of their work*. It’s not networking to have a Toronto or Stratford actor teach a student in a small town hours away, because that doesn’t provide them meaningful work opportunities, or if it does, they’d need to move! Connected to points number two and three, they are likely to have better opportunities if their teacher works in or around the same region where they go to school.

I think there’s also an argument like “why don’t we just put more public money into the arts and into arts training”. That would be nice, I’d support that, but like…we’re 6 years into a provincial government who doesn’t fund the arts and will probably get another majority government, and about to get a federal government who doesn’t support the arts. Every artistic director at every theatre knows we’re in an era of hard choices that’s about to become an era of much harder choices.

And some people - maybe this writer, definitely lots of artists - think we don’t need a private sector, or that most of the commanding heights of the economy should be public, and when that’s the case, we’ll have lots of funding left over for all sorts of things. Whether or not that’s the case, I think lots of artists would agree that while the private sector is dominant, it would be nice if lots of the funds in that sector went to the arts rather than to other things that can take up room in discretionary spending budgets. And as small as it is, students putting their tuition money into these colleges and family and friends attending their shows is private money, and it seems to me a bad investment for future arts production. And that private money - from big musicals, from touring comedies, from film and television, it can subsidize other sections of the arts world, and we should be encouraging it. It would be nice if Canada could turn out a few more Drowsy Chaparone’s and Come From Away’s, and while one of those was indeed developed at an Ontario College, I think it’s the sole exception compared to pieces that were developed in the independents, regionals, and big players.

This isn’t to say public funds shouldn’t go towards the arts, even in small towns. I think there’s a good case to make - economic development and tourism, sure, but also, human expression, reason for living, all that kind of stuff. And the amount of money that the Canadian government spends on the arts is a rounding error anyway against the corporate subsidies and other spending. But it’s not clear to me that the best way to spend public arts money is in small colleges in cities with small arts scenes. To take the money that pays for land, teachers, and student tuitions, and transfer it to operating/project funds for small arts organizations in cities with big arts scenes seems like a more rational use of funds, or to transfer it to community groups, charities, or non-profit theatres that can tour or bring in actors from other areas. Or if you want to spend it all on training, why not direct it to our existing non-profit theatres - our Tarragons, London Grands, Cahoots, etc - to offer a smaller number of apprenticeships/professional development through academy programs? Toronto’s Soulpepper Academy, Regina’s Globe Theatre Conservatory, Edmonton’s Citadel/Banff training program, all three disproportionately produce working actors compared to our existing drama schools, and allows audiences to see shows with more than three cast members.

And this also isn’t to denigrate the graduates of these programs. I’ve met tons of them, and they’re to-a-one as smart as graduates of other programs offered by universities and colleges. I know large numbers of Ontario college acting graduates, and they’re all equally equipped to work in corporate and service settings as my fellow graduates from the University of Saskatchewan, even though they may not have taken Chemistry and Music Theory 101 to get that rounded liberal arts education. A more dynamic private sector and less classist public sector would gladly absorb these people who are good at textual analysis, public speaking, teamwork, and many other soft skills due to their training.

But I think most of these schools aren’t serving anyone, besides the handful of teachers who make some decent part time money teaching an acting class here and there. It’s not a good use of public money, it’s a disservice to the students, and it adds way too much surplus labour to the industry.

This essay feels pretty dire. I’m essentially asking “should we stop people from pursuing their dreams”. But I don’t think we’re letting people pursue their dreams by going to schools that don’t put them on a path to success. I think we’re taking their time and their money, and trading it for a piece of paper. I certainly feel that way about my own educational experiences, and I went to schools putatively more prestigious and job oriented.

I haven’t named any of the specific colleges that should stop offering these programs, because I genuinely like a lot of the people who work at them and graduate from them. But if you were 17 again wanting to be an actor, and you didn’t get into NTS or UofT or Studio 58, and looked at a regional acting college - would you go there? Would you tell your kids it's a good idea?

I know my answer.
