---
title: 'Pretextual Planning'
date: 2024-09-02T19:46:35-04:00
tags: ['Planning','Policy','Politics','Housing']
---

Sean Galbraith and [Strong Towns](https://www.strongtowns.org/journal/2021/4/29/pretextual-planning-is-absolutely-everywhere) have both talked about pretextual planning. Pretextual planning is fairly self explanatory - a city (or other level of government, or maybe a private business or NGO) creates a plan, and elements of that plan are a pretext for doing something else.

The strong towns argument brings up parking requirements, which are a horrible policy idea that forces developers to build expensive parking, despite small and midsized cities having a massive parking surplus, and large cities trying to redevelop parking into higher order uses like housing, public amenities, and employment sites. Planners use parking minimums as a pretext for getting concessions from developers. When I worked as a planning advisor, the parking minimums in downtown Toronto (which have since been eliminated - except for in rooming houses, which is completely pretextual to ban rooming houses) were egregious, and no planner enforced them. Rather, they used them as a bargaining chip to get more community benefits, or a donation towards something like a Bike Share station.

This was unaccountable and in my opinion undermines public trust, but it’s also pretty small beans. The bike share station might have been something like half a million dollars. That’s three downtown parking spots, maybe. Any developer would be happy to make that trade to lose a 50 spot requirement. It’s unprincipled, but again, small beans.

The problem is that small beans add up. Big developers can afford the lawyers and planners to get around them, but that ultimately raises the prices of homes by both diluting the supply (small builders can’t enter the market) and by increasing soft costs like legal fees. And there’s pretext everywhere in society, especially in public administration, and it creates layers of uncertainty that drives up costs and decreases transparency and public accountability. It’s obvious in municipal planning documents because a) they’re public documents,  and b) they’re openly contradictory.

I think this is most clearly seen in Toronto’s building heights.

There’s a ton of planning documents that builders have to go through, but the main pieces are the official plan and the zoning bylaw(s). The official plan speaks at a high level to the type of buildings and communities that the city wants to see. It’s the guiding document for council’s land use strategy. If council were a business, this would be the business plan that they’d present to banks and lenders, would be the public facing “about us” page, and would inform all communications sent to customers. The zoning bylaw is the equivalent of regulations and standard operating procedures - heights, lot sizes, units per lot, distance from the street, etc.

You would think, if you wanted to design good bylaws, you could have them facilitate the objectives in your plan. If you were running a business that was creating a new email service, and your business plan said “our emails send with less than 1 second delay”, an internal control that delayed each email send by say, 6 hours, would be absolutely ludicrous. You may wish to have controls for certain reasons - say, emails that seem confidential are delayed by some period of time, or emails that are written in a rage, or something along those lines. Your regulations or standard operating procedures would be written to facilitate the desired outcome, with controls for exceptions and potential problems.

Toronto has decided to do it backwards. The city’s official plan speaks to neighbourhoods, which are the largest single land use in Toronto. In the plan’s definition, a neighbourhood “is made up of residential uses in lower scale buildings such as detached houses, semi-detached houses, duplexes, triplexes and townhouses, as well as interspersed walk-up apartments that are no higher than four storeys”. A further item mentions “four storeys or less”. One would think that the neighbourhood designation in the zoning bylaw, more or less, allows for four storeys.

But that’s not the case. Toronto’s City Council recently went through a large scale review of the zoning code to allow for duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes in neighbourhoods, where they were previously banned (despite, again, clearly being referenced in the definition). The planning department then went through the neighbourhood height overlay map, which is a separate zoning bylaw that speaks to building heights allowed as of right.

The resulting recommendations - where heights were less than 10m, allow up to 10m. Where heights were between 10-12m, allow 12m. In imperial units, that’s about 32’10” or 39’4”.

The problem is that 12m/39’4” is too short. A standard residential storey is 9 feet of living space plus 1 foot of mechanical between stories. If your building starts absolutely at grade, you’re building 40 feet, and that’s before thinking about the pitch of the roof, which in a potentially snowy city like Toronto is important.

So despite an official plan that says 4 storeys are allowed in neighbourhoods, and a years long compliance exercise to allow 4 unit buildings that are potentially 4 storeys, there are 0 neighbourhoods where a normal 4 storey building is allowed as-of-right.

This seems like small beans, right? If you’re allowed to build 39’4” and your proposed building is 40’, surely there must be a way to get that rule slightly bent. And there is. The city has something called The Committee of Adjustment, which allows for variances to the zoning bylaw. All you need to do is pay thousands of dollars for your committee application, pay for a planning deputation by an accredited planner, wait the 3-6 months for your committee appointment while paying any costs on the land, and survive potentially hundreds of letters of objection from local busybodies. Then you might get approval from a committee of unaccountable and unelected adjudicators, and you can build a type of building the city says that it wants and that it allows.

Clearly this is absurd. No one starting from first principles would design a system like this. No one starting a private business would make their business operate like this. And this is the type of governmental policy that makes normal people into libertarians - the idea that thousands of little items in government policy are poorly thought out, or are very well thought out to benefit certain groups - in this case, NIMBYs, but in other cases, interest groups or whatever other shadowy group may exist.

Good government reformers should be obsessed with cleaning up existing problems like this, and public servants should have a culture that makes their recommendations textual, not pretextual. If politicians want to muddle with recommendations, fine. They’re elected, they’re accountable for their actions. But when planning staff came forward with a recommendation to allow four storeys, and a zoning bylaw that banned four storeys, that was an exercise in cynicism, and should be seen as such.
