---
title: 'The Failure of Opinion Polling'
date: 2024-09-10T21:16:22-04:00
tags: ['Politics']
---

Jamelle Bouie posted on BlueSky about issue polling being the worst thing that has happened to progressives. When Jamelle posts something, a lot of people inevitably get mad, so I’m not sure if the post is still up. But he followed it up with the idea that progressives look at issue polls, see that people generally agree with them on a given poll, and commit to mobilization strategy rather than persuasion and coalition building.

I had a beer the other day with a friend who worked on a major progressive election campaign. They did an internal poll on upzoning to drive affordability. It was incredibly unpopular, and the policy was ditched.

These two things are clearly two sides of the same coin. Jamelle is right that it’s toxic to progressives. But I think it’s more than that. It’s toxic to the entire body politic.

Political polling is a pretty new thing, really only coming into its own pre-WW2, and even then, it was a mess. Early methods were based on market research, where organizations like reader’s digest would collect massive amounts of responses and extrapolate those to the general population. Then Gallup came in with statistical modelling, which was a new innovation in market research. The models aimed to collect a representative sample of potential voters rather than a large sample, and it was way more accurate. There have been a bunch of improvements to the polling process, and Gallup themselves have messed up a number of times, but on the whole, the system still kinda works. Polling firms get a representative sample - usually around 1000 people, which should give an acceptably low margin of error vs price of conducting the poll, and ask a simple binary choice - Republican or Democrat. Here in Canada and other multi-party democracies the math is slightly different, but the method is exactly the same.

What doesn’t seem to work as well is issue polling. In issue polling, pollsters will usually ask three types of questions:

1) issue identification
2) potential solutions
3) desired results

That’s obviously a whole different kettle of fish than binary choices. Questions about binary choices - should I vote democrat or republican, say - contain within them whole hosts of qualitative information like issue prioritization, what solutions to issues might be, what results might come of those. But the question itself is about capability and intention as a voter. A voter may follow closely or not at all, but it’s a field in which essentially everyone has the same capabilities. Some people are political professionals, but every voter is as good at voting as everyone else.

Issue polling, on the other hand, has enormously different inputs. It’s why marketing and research need to exist - people have different levels of interest, expertise, and skin in the game for all the issues that politics might touch. Subtle changes in wording can massively change people’s opinions on a subject. Changing a questionnaire from “do you intend to vote for a Republican or a Democrat?” likely won’t have a much different result from “would you rather a Republican or Democrat win the election?”. Changing a question from “do you think your city needs more apartments?” is going to have a massively different result from “do you think there should be more apartments near your house?”.

This was seen in the United States with questions around Medicare for All. Questions broadly phrased as “do you support Medicare for All” have enormous political support. But that doesn’t really mean anything. Medicare is a currently existing program that the people who use usually like. Medicare for All is a branding about getting rid of the current healthcare system and replacing it with a single government payer, like in Canada. Every question that was more specific polled worse the more specific it got - would you be okay with raising taxes to pay for it, would you be okay with potentially increased wait times, would you be okay with people in the insurance industry losing their jobs, would you be okay with losing your current service provider, etc.

None of that is meant to denigrate Medicare for All as an idea. Even a pretty sloppy implementation would probably be better in a lot of ways than the current American system, which has a whole bunch of people uninsured, a bunch of people underinsured, tons of people with awful copays and premiums, and oodles of bureaucracy and administrative spending. But people aren’t experts on that, and they have things they like about their current situation. Union members and professionals in America often have health care plans that are the envy of the world, with broad and deep coverage for a range of health adjacent services. They clearly wouldn’t want to lose that and go on basic Medicare, and that fear would be reflected in the polls, which can’t contain every contingency.

But there was a candidate who ran mostly on Medicare for All, and he was pretty damn popular. He almost got the nomination in 2016 for the party that ended up winning the popular vote, and he won several major states and was a frontrunner in 2020 for the party that won the popular vote and eventually the election. While campaigning on the issue opened him up to some attacks, it’s tough to say it hurt him, considering he was an underperforming senator from a very small state who almost became the president.

Issue polling fails because it limits political imagination. Bernie identified healthcare as a problem facing voters in 2016 and 2020. He took a swing on a solution that was popular in the abstract, but extremely unpopular in the details. But he didn’t run on the details, and people didn’t fault him for it. The position definitely opened him up to attacks, and because he made improving medical coverage in the US table stakes, now there are clips of candidate Kamala Harris saying she’d like to ban private insurance. That’s not great for her, and a large amount of clips like that can add up in people’s perception, but again, it’s far from destructive. Because a voter answering extremely specific policy questions on the phone and checking a box in a voting booth are fundamentally different things.

Same thing with upzoning, or other similar policies. Clearly this campaign recognized people prioritized the housing crisis. When asked by a polling firm on the phone if they support upzoning the whole city, they probably think that means there’ll be a 30 story tower built right next to their house. That would happen to vanishingly few people, probably about the same amount as it happens to now. But even raising that question, and getting that bad answer, makes politicians take viable solutions out of contention before they’re even on the table. And that’s a huge problem.
